---
layout: post
title: Linear Regression
subtitle: Here I go over the motivations, properties, and interpretations of linear regression, specifically ordinary least squares regression.
---
{% katexmm %}
Linear regression is often the first technique taught to undergraduates in a machine learning course. This is a testament to its simplicity, historical significance, and the intuition it provides for designing statistical models. In this post I derive and discuss ordinary least squares (OLS), a particular flavor of linear regression that is most commonly taught in an introductory ML course.
## Predicting House Prices
Suppose we are given a dataset containing the details of house sales in the US. The dataset contains the square footage, number of bedrooms, number of bathrooms, the sale price, and other features of a large collection of previously sold houses.
{% endkatexmm %}
| Sale Price    | Area       | Bedrooms    | Bathrooms | ... |
| :---          | :---       | :---        | :---      | :---|
| 221900        | 1180       | 3           | 1         | ... |
| 180000        | 770        | 2           | 1         | ... |
| 604000        | 1960       | 4           | 3         | ... |
| ... | ... | ... | ...
{% katexmm %}
The challenge we face is to predict the final sale price using these features. That is, we want to model the relationship between sale price and our other features such as area, bedrooms, bathrooms, etc. In linear regression, the critical assumption is that this relationship is linear, specifically a weighted sum
$$
    \text{sale price} = \text{area}\cdot w_\text{area} + \text{bedrooms}\cdot w_\text{bedrooms} + \text{baths}\cdot w_\text{baths} + \dots + \varepsilon
$$
where $w_\text{feature}$ denotes the weight assigned to that particular feature and $\varepsilon$ is the unobserved contributions to the price that aren’t captured by our features, such as market randomness. We include $\varepsilon$ to ensure that the left-hand side and right-hand side are equal, and we refer to $\varepsilon$ as *"errors"*. Importantly we think of the the weights $w$ in the model above as describing some *actual*, *ground-truth* process from which we obtain noisy observations (our data). Our goal then is to use those observations to find an approximation of $w$ which we denote $\hat{w}$, that closely matches the true weights. This process is called **fitting**. To start, let's rewrite our model using mathematical notation. In doing so we will sacrifice specificity for generality, and succinctness, as well as gain access to a toolbox of mathematical techniques.
<br><br>
First, we will simplify our model and only use one feature, the area (in square feet). Lets denote the area and sale price of the $i^{th}$ home in our dataset as $x_i$ and $y_i$ respectively. Our model then, looks like
$$
    y_i = x_iw + \varepsilon_i
$$
Here $w$ is the slope of our line or how much the sale price changes for an increase in the area of the home. If we add an offset term $w_0$ you might recognize this as the slope-intercept form of a line from algebra class.
$$
    y_i = x_iw + w_0 + \varepsilon_i
$$
How then can we estimate our model parameters, $w$ and $w_0$? In truth we don't know the true relationship In machine learning we conceptualize fitting (and learning more generally) as an optimization problem, and to solve an optimization problem we need some function to optimize. We want a function that measures how good a particular $w$ and $w_0$ are at fitting our data. In practice we usually formulate this function as measuring how *bad* our choice of parameters are and we try to find the parameters which minimize this function (in [my last post on maximum likelihood estimation](https://jeremyschroeter.com/2024/03/28/mle_intro.html) we took the opposite approach and formulated the optimization as a maximization problem). There are many such functions, referred to as *loss functions*, that we could choose, and they will all yield slightly different results, but for linear regression the most common choice is to use the [least squared error](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Least_squares?oldformat=true) (LSE). If we have $N$ different data points, the LSE is defined as 
$$
\text{LSE} = \sum_{i=1}^N (y_i - x_iw - w_0)^2
$$
In words, the LSE is the sum over our dataset of the squared differences between our models guess at $y_i$ and the actual sale price *given* a particular choice of $w$ and $w_0$. The LSE can only equal $0$ when our estimate of all the sale prices in our dataset are perfectly correct. Our model is linear and so if this were the case, it would mean that our data lies perfectly on a straight line. Obviously this is highly unrealistic, but if our data follows a linear trend, then optimizing the LSE can result in a decent predictive model.
<br><br>
You might be asking yourself, *why optimize the squared differences rather than the absolute differences, isn't that more intuitive?* Admittedly, optimizing the [absolute differences](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Least_absolute_deviations?oldformat=true) is a more intuitive approach, however this is actually *less* common than using the LSE. This is largely for practical reasons. The LSE has a closed-form solution which we will derive shortly, whereas the least absolute differences requires iterative approximation to converge on an answer. In addition, because the LSE grows quadratically, we end up penalizing bad choices of parameters much more harshly with the LSE than if we were to use absolute differences.
<br><br>
Okay with all that setup lets find our parameter values. We are trying to solve the following optimization problems.
$$
\hat{w}_\text{LSE}, \hat{w}_0  = \argmin_{w, w_0} \sum_{i=1}^N (y_i - x_iw - w_0)^2
$$
As is the case in most optimization problems we will try to find the values for our parameters when the derivative of our function is equal to $0$. Let's start with finding our coefficient.
### Finding $\hat{w}_\text{LSE}$
We begin by taking the derivative of the LSE with respect to $w$
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \frac{\partial \text{LSE}}{\partial w} &= \frac{\partial}{\partial w}\sum_{i=1}^N (y_i - x_iw - w_0)^2 \\
        &= \sum_{i=1}^N 2(y_i - x_iw - w_0)(x_i)
        &= 2\sum_{i=1}^N x_iy_i - x_i^2w - x_iw_0
        % &= \frac{\partial}{\partial w}\sum_{i=1}^N (y_i - x_iw + w_0)(y_i - x_iw + w_0) \\
        % &= \frac{\partial}{\partial w}\sum_{i=1}^N y_i^2 - 2y_ix_iw - y_iw_0 + x_iw^2 - x_iww_0 + w_0^2 \\
        % &= \sum_{i=1}^N -2y_ix_i + 2x_iw - x_iw_0
    \end{aligned}
$$
<br><br>
Rather than writing our dataset as a table we will write it as pairs of house features and sale prices. We'll wrap our features into a vector and denote it in bold $\mathbf{x}_i$, and we will denote our sale prices as $y_i$, where $i$ is an indexing variable used to denote the $i^{th}$ entry in our dataset. You will often hear $y_i$ referred to as a *response* variable. Using our particular features, one entry in our dataset now looks like this
$$
\mathbf{x}_i = 
\begin{bmatrix}
    \text{area} \\ \text{bedrooms} \\ \text{bathrooms} \\ \vdots
\end{bmatrix}_i\quad
y_i = \text{sale price}
$$
This is a good way to understand where our data comes from, but for most of the remainder of this article I'll use a more general formulation.
<br><br>
We will denote the $D$ features of our $i^{th}$ datapont as a vector $\mathbf{x}_i\in\mathbb{R}^D$, our $D$ weights as a vector $\mathbf{w}\in\mathbb{R}^D$, and our error terms and reponse variables as scalars $y_i, \varepsilon_i\in\mathbb{R}$.
$$
    \mathbf{x}_i = 
    \begin{bmatrix} x_{i, 1} \\ \vdots \\ x_{i, d} \\ \vdots \\ x_{i, D} \end{bmatrix}
    \quad
    \mathbf{w} = 
    \begin{bmatrix}
    w_1 \\ \vdots \\ w_d \\ \vdots \\ w_D
    \end{bmatrix}
$$
In linear regression we model our response variables as a linear combination of the elements in the corresponding feature vector. For the $i^{th}$ data point we have
$$
    y_i = x_{i, 1}w_1 + \dots + x_{i, d}w_d + \dots + x_{i, D} w_D + \varepsilon_i \\
$$
We can more succinctly write this using vector notation [A1](#appendix_one).
$$
y_i = \mathbf{x}_i^\top\mathbf{w} + \varepsilon_i
$$
We can write out the model for our whole dataset if we collect our responses and errors into vectors and our features into a matrix.
$$
\mathbf{y} = \mathbf{Xw} + \boldsymbol{\varepsilon}
$$
Each row of $\mathbf{X}$ is now a different data point and the columns correspond to that data points features. If we have $N$ data points
$$
\mathbf{X}\in\mathbb{R}^{N\times D}\quad \mathbf{X}
=
\begin{bmatrix}
\rule[.5ex]{2.5ex}{0.5pt} & \mathbf{x}_1^\top & \rule[.5ex]{2.5ex}{0.5pt} \\
& \vdots & \\
\rule[.5ex]{2.5ex}{0.5pt} & \mathbf{x}_i^\top & \rule[.5ex]{2.5ex}{0.5pt} \\
& \vdots & \\
\rule[.5ex]{2.5ex}{0.5pt} & \mathbf{x}_N^\top & \rule[.5ex]{2.5ex}{0.5pt}
\end{bmatrix}
=
\begin{bmatrix}
x_{1,1} & \cdots & x_{1,d} & \cdots & x_{1,D} \\
\vdots & & \vdots & & \vdots \\
x_{i,1} & \cdots & x_{i,d} & \cdots & x_{i,D} \\
\vdots & & \vdots & & \vdots \\
x_{N,1} & \cdots & x_{N,d} & \cdots & x_{N,D}
\end{bmatrix}
$$
### Appendix
<a name="appendix_one"></a>**A1**<br>
In vector notation, $\mathbf{x}^\top\mathbf{w}$ (read x *transpose* w) is used to denote a dot product.
$$
    \mathbf{x}, \mathbf{w} \in \mathbb{R}^D \\
    \mathbf{x}^\top\mathbf{w} = x_1w_1 + x_2w_2 + \dots + x_D w_D
$$
{% endkatexmm %}