---
layout: post
title: An Introduction to Maximum Likelihood Estimation
subtitle: Discussing maximum likelihood estimation as an excuse to test out LaTeX rendering.
---

{% katexmm %}
In statistics, maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is a fundamental technique used to estimate the parameters of a presumed probability distribution based on observed data. By relying on a few important assumptions about the data generating process, MLE allows us to derive parameter estimates that maximize the probability of observing the given data. Here, I go over the basics of MLE as the first part in a series of posts explaining the connection between MLE and least squares regression.
To begin, let's start with a concrete example and then we'll try to generalize what we learn from it.
## Flipping Biased Coins
Imagine you are given a biased coin and are tasked with approximating the probability with which it lands heads or tails. How do you go about doing this? Firstly, since we know there are only two possible outcomes we can say that if $P(H) = \theta$ then it must be the case that $P(T) = 1 - \theta$. Additionally, we know that we have to observe a large number of flips before we can say much of anything about the probabilities, and we also know that these flips are independent of one another. Let's call the number of flips we observe $n$. Finally, if you've been exposed to basic probability theory you might remember that the probability of two independent events co-occuring is the product of their individual probabilities [A1](#appendix_one).
$$ P(x)\perp P(y) \rightarrow P(x, y) = P(x)P(y)$$
With this information we can write the probability of observing a particular sequence of $n$ coin flips which we denote as $\mathcal{D}$ given a particular probability of flipping heads $\theta$:
$$ P(\mathcal{D} \mid \theta) = \theta^k(1 - \theta)^{n - k} $$
where $k$ is the number of times we flip heads and $n - k$ is the number of times we flip tails.
<br><br>
Now, ask yourself the following question: given some observed set of flips $\mathcal{D}$, what value for $\theta$ maximizes $P(\mathcal{D})$. In other words, what value of $\theta$ makes our observed sequence most probable? That number *is* the MLE estimate.
$$\hat{\theta}_{\text{MLE}}=\argmax_\theta{P(\mathcal{D}\mid \theta)}$$
Said another way, given a set of observed flips, what value for $\theta$ could we choose that would maximize the chances of observing those outcomes?
<br><br>
At first encounter the MLE estimate can often feel slippery or circular. We are using our data to approximate a model that best explains...our data. However, MLE is really the operationalization of a deep intuition: *given an outcome, what conditions would have most likely led to this outcome?* The mathematical formulation may not be as intuitive, but the underlying idea is beautifully straightforward.
<br>
<blockquote style="font-style: italic">
"At a superficial level, the idea of maximum likelihood must be prehistoric: early hunters and gatherers may not have used the words 'method of maximum likelihood' to describe their choice of where and how to hunt and gather, but it is hard to believe they would have been surprised if their method had been described in those terms."<sub><a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/0804.2996.pdf">[1]</a></sub>
</blockquote>
If we have some data, and we are willing to assume that out data comes from a particular class of distribution (a normal distribution, for example), then the MLE simply asks what parameters (mean and variance, for example) to give that distribution to make it **most consistent** with our data.
<br><br>
Okay, lets see the MLE in action. We are tasked with solving the following optimization problem
$$ \argmax_{\theta}P(\mathcal{D}\mid\theta) = \argmax_{\theta}\left[\theta^k(1 - \theta)^{n - k}\right]$$
The solution to said problem will be our MLE estimate $\hat{\theta}_{MLE}$ which is the approximate probability of our biased coin flipping heads. To start we can notice that whatever argument maximizes our function will also maximize its natural logarithm. Reframing the problem this way will allow us to get rid of those exponents and turn multiplication into addition.
$$\begin{aligned}
\argmax_{\theta}\left[\theta^k(1 - \theta)^{n - k}\right] &= \argmax_{\theta}\left[\log(\theta^k(1 - \theta)^{n - k})\right] \\
&= \argmax_{\theta}\left[\log(\theta^k) + \log((1-\theta)^{n-k})\right]\\
&= \argmax_{\theta}\left[k\log\theta + (n-k)\log(1-\theta)\right]
\end{aligned}$$
So far all we have done is some algebraic manipulation of $P(\mathcal{D} \mid \theta)$. Now to solve the optimization problem, we can take the derivative of our function and solve for its maximum by setting it equal to zero.
$$
\begin{aligned}
    \frac{d}{d\theta}\log P(\mathcal{D}\mid\theta) &= \frac{d}{d\theta}\log\left[k\log\theta + (n-k)\log(1-\theta)\right]\\
    &=\frac{k}{\theta} - \frac{n-k}{1-\theta}
\end{aligned}
$$
Now we set our equation equal to $0$ and solve for $\hat{\theta}_{MLE}$
$$
\begin{aligned}
0 &= \frac{k}{\theta} - \frac{n-k}{1-\theta}\\
&=\frac{\theta k(1-\theta)}{\theta} - \frac{\theta(n-k)(1-\theta)}{1-\theta}\\
&= k(1 - \theta) - \theta(n - k)\\
&= k - k\theta - n\theta + k\theta \\
&= k - n\theta\\
\hat{\theta}_{MLE} &= \frac{k}{n}
\end{aligned}
$$
And so at the end of all of that we find that the maximum likelihood estimate for the probability of flipping heads given a dataset is simply the fraction of head flips in the data. That was a lot of math for such a simple answer, but we have rigorously confirmed our intuitions.
## Generalizing the MLE 
We begin by observing a set of data points $$X_1, X_2, \dots, X_n$$
We assume these data points are sampled **independently** from a **known class** of probability distributions $f(x, \theta^*)$.  Ultimately, what we want from MLE is an accurate approximation of $\theta^*$ which we will refer to as $\hat{\theta}$. Crucial to getting there will be the two highlighted assumptions: **(1)** that our data points are independent of one another, and **(2)** the form of the presumed distribution is a good model of those data points.
### Appendix
<a name="appendix_one"></a>A1.<br>
If this seems unintuitive to you, imagine you have two unweighted $6$-sided dice and want to know the probability of rolling $6$ twice. If you were to roll a $1$ with the first die then there would still be $6$ possibilities of outcomes for the second die. This is actually true no matter what number we roll first and so for each outcome of the first roll we have $6$ possible outcomes for the second. Thus our total number of possibilities is $6^2 = 36$ and so the probability of any outcome is $\frac{1}{36}$. In fact, if we had $3$ dice then we would have $6^3$ possibilities or if we added a coin flip we would have $2 \cdot 6^2$ possibilities because for each of the $36$ previous outcomes we could flip either heads or tails. All of this is a function of the events being independent from one another.
{% endkatexmm %}